\input texinfo
@setfilename wacc.info
@settitle Wacc.wacc
@documentencoding UTF-8

@titlepage
@title Wacc.wacc
@subtitle A self hosting Wacc compiller
@author Nixon Enraght-Moony
@end titlepage


@summarycontents
@contents

@node Top
@top wacc.wacc

@node overview-wacc
@chapter An overview of the Wacc

If your reading this, you probably already framiliar with the Wacc language.
Hence this will not be a introduction to the language, nor a formal specification.
Instead it is an overview of relavent pieces to building a self hosting wacc compiler.
For a formal specification of the language, see 
@url{https://gitlab.doc.ic.ac.uk/lab2122_spring/wacc_examples/-/raw/master/WACCLangSpec.pdf, the spec}
and @url{https://gitlab.doc.ic.ac.uk/lab2122_spring/wacc_examples, the examples repo}.


@itemize
@item Incomplete Specification

The Specification given for Wacc is incomplete. @url{https://gitlab.doc.ic.ac.uk/rd3918/wacc_examples/-/raw/master/The%20WACC%20Language%20Specification/WACCLangSpec.pdf, this version} 
is what @xref{wacc-to-c} links too, but in time my own verion will be made.

@item Bad strings

Wacc has very limited string support. They can do
@itemize
@item @code{print} and @code{println} them
@item Be constructed by a litteral.
@end itemize

Thats all! So the only use for strings is fixed strings for output.
Most of the ``string'' handling code must use @code{char[]}

@end itemize

@node extensions
@section Extensions
A key part of the ``Wacc Experience'' @registeredsymbol{} is designing and implementing extensions to the language.
Wacc.wacc attempts to not make use of these, mainly to prove a point, but also to make it easier to implement, at the
cost of making it harder to implement.

One exception is the ``extern'' extension, which allows calling arbitrary C functions (provided their ABI can be expressed
in the unextended wacc type system). This is nessisary for reading input (@xref{input}). However to keep this 
modular, to allow for alternate IO extensions to be used to bootstrap, only @url{https://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/Character-Input.html#index-getchar, getchar}
is used. It is declaired as @code{extern int getchar()}, and we assume @code{EOF} is -1 and C's @code{int} is the same
as wacc's @code{int} (32 bits each), which is true on most modern systems.

Their are many extensions that I would like to use, but havn't, as they would increase the work to implement them,
and would make this less of a ``self hosting wacc compiller'', and more of a ``self hosting wacc++ compiler'', even
though it could be more accutatly described as a ``self hosting wacc with extern compiller''.

@itemize
@item Arbitrary Expressions: Don't have special items in <assign-rhs>.
@item Switch statements
@item Agragate types
@item C style enums / C++ enum classes
@item Rust style enums
@item IO Library
@item Module system
@item More flexible if statement (eg if without else, else if without several fi's)
@item Dynamic array allocation
@item Garbage Collection
@item String and array slices
@item Built in generic higher level types (Go's slice and map)
@end itemize

@node limitations
@chapter Limitations

Due the the idiosyncracies of WACC, and the fact that writing something that works at all
is hard enough, wacc.wacc has several limitations over a ``fully complient'' Wacc compiler.

@node lack-of-checks
@section Lack of checks.

Wacc.wacc will assume that the input is valid an not check it. This includes, but is not
limited to

@itemize
@item Functions existing
@item Function arity
@item Function argument types
@item Function return types.
@end itemize

@node input-file-size
@section Input file size

Wacc.wacc can handle at most @math{L} ``logical lines'' of input, where each logical line
has has at most @math{C} characters. For more info @xref{input}.

These parametes are easily changed with the @code{NUM_LINES} and @code{NUM_CHARS} constants,
in @code{py/gen_line_alloc.py}. Currenty they are @code{NUM_LINES = 3_000} and @code{NUM_CHARS = 400}.
As the compiller is written, these will be increased to handle the larger input. I can't imagine anyone
writing a program larger than the compiler, but if you do please let me know!

Longer input that this will do something, possible undefined.

@node build-system
@chapter The build system

@node bs2
@chapter BS2: A Expiramental compiller

@node wacc-to-c
@chapter Wacc-To-C: A Bootstrap compiller

@node lexing
@chapter Lexing

Other than reading input, lexing is relativly trivial. The lexer is based
on the @url{https://craftinginterpreters.com/scanning-on-demand.html, clox scanner},
by Bob Nystrom.

@node input
@section Reading input

Reading input in wacc is suprisingly hard. The only build in way is the @code{read}, and it only
supports integer and character IO. Additionaly these only read after a newline is entered, and
their is no way to detect an EOF, making it (AFAIKT) unsuitable for reading input. Therefor
getchar(3) is used. @xref{extensions} for how this is done.

The next chalenge is to read all of stdin. The problem with this is that to allocate a char buffer
to read @math{n} charecters, you need to allocate @math{4n} bytes (@code{' ',}). This is a problem for the
compiler self hosting, as the buffer wouldnt be large enough to read the bytes that create the buffer.

Therefor, instead of reading stdin to @code{char[]}, it is read to @code{char[][]}, where each line has
its own buffer allocated. Becauase array literals are secretly @code{malloc}s, we can have one literal
for the list of lines, and one literal for a single line, which is shared amound lines.

However, we still want each token to only be on one line buffer. Most of the time using
One line buffer per real line is fine, but not for multi-line string and char literal.
Therefor `io::read_all` keeps track of if it is in a string (including escapes), and only switches to a new
line buffer on a new line not in a string/char lit. This is the cause of ``logical lines'' in @ref{input-file-size}.

Finaly memory management is a little tricky. `io::read_all` takes 2 sentinal charecter arrays, both
of which should be empty. 1 is the default empty line, and the other is just used to indicate the end
of input. This allows freeing all non empty line buffers, as they are unique, and then freeing 
the 2 sentinals.

@bye
